All right in this lecture we're going to go ahead and go over something called cross country lines.
Now what our cross contour lines.
Well contour lines are the lines that make out the outside shape of or the outside line of your shape
and cross country lines or lines that can be used to create the inside values of your shape.
Now let me show you the difference between just a normal country line and a cross country line.
So here we have a sphere and we have a second sphere too.
The first one we're just going to use contour lines straight lines and they're not going to be cross
contour lines.
So this means that let's say that we have our Shatto kind of more along this edge like so.
So I want to go ahead and start adding in that shading
and I'm doing it just by adding cross-current or contour lines so that lines can definitely be used
to add value and shading and highlight to your artwork.
But as you can see these are just completely straight.
And then I can add a second layer if I want to that's a little bit darker.
So and then I could add a darker edge along here and then that would kind of create my bounce light
along this bottom edge and I can also kind of bring in a little bit more of the lighter edge there to
soften that edge.
And so those are straight contour lines.
Now these work pretty well.
And depending on the style of artwork you're trying to create these might work like let's say you're
trying to recreate a Victorian styled or a turn of the century solid piece of artwork.
This could definitely work because printing presses would very often print in this style with straight
lines that would make up an image.
But in most cases you're probably not going to be doing it.
So you want to go with cross contour lines.
So what across contour lines or cross contour lines purchase lines that go along the surface of your
actual object.
So because this is a sphere we wouldn't have straight lines going across otherwise that would make that
more of the flat surface or at least it would look more flat.
So what we want to do is we want to add in our contouring lines but we want them to go along with the
form.
So for example we can start with our darker shadow that will make up most of the shadow of our sphere.
So we're just going to add in those lines and they're going to have that same curve that curves along
with the sphere itself.
And we can just go ahead and keep layering those in as you can see you probably getting the idea that
hot cross country lines are just lines that follow the sheep of whatever it is that you're creating
highlights and values on.
And then we can go ahead and add it in that darker area right here in the middle.
So the idea is just to stay with that form of your shape.
All right.
Now if you're still not understanding what Cross copper lines are let's have a look at a square or a
cube.
So if we were to do this with just straight contouring lines let's see how that would look.
We're going to make this site our shadow side.
And we're going to make this top part our highlight and this site will be our mid tone color.
So first we're going to start off by adding that shadow in like so and as you can see I'm just using
straight lines
that we're going to go ahead and add in some lighter lines on the side.
And I want to add some a little tiny bit of shadow on the top part too even though it's a highlight.
So what we'll do is we're going to read later this a second time with a little bit darker lines and
then we're going to lightly add some lines along the top like so.
So now this is creating the illusion that we have some form some highlighting some shadow but it would
look a lot more realistic if our contouring lines were actually going along the shape of our image going
along the surface.
So I'm going to switch over to a shirt and pencil.
So how would we do that.
Well let's start off with the shadow.
So rather than going straight like this we can create more of a surface illusion like going along with
this wind or here.
So that is incorrect perspective.
So I'm just going to start adding those lines in like so.
Great.
Next we want to go ahead and add in the highly amik are the shadow in this area.
Now this drawing this is actually correct.
This is actually crossing contour lines so we can go ahead and just copy what we did there.
You almost want to pretend like as if there is wooden slabs going across the surface is in what direction
with those lines becomes.
Now let's go ahead and add it to the top.
So for the top we could either go straight across.
But just to get the idea more crossed.
We're going to go ahead and Adam in the state Agnel angle like so
perfect.
So these are examples of cross country lines.
They make your artwork look a lot better.
Now let's go ahead and look at some real examples of where we've used cross-country lines in our drawing.
So put this aside and then I'm just going to grab our previous drawing we did and let's have a look
at what we've done here.
So a really good example of where this cross Caterine line is happening is right here along this edge
of the brow.
So we have a kind of almost curving and that's curving into the shape of our parabola which is underneath
the skin.
It's part of the skull.
We're not going to get too much into that right now but it's going along the form in the shape smooth
over here we have more of a curve going downwards and we also see that cross country line on the island
where these lines the shadow lines are following the form and the shape of our island.
Same with over here it's going in the same direction as our Eilidh.
And we even see that with our eyebrows now even though our hairs are making it up it's still kind of
the same idea.
So the hair is flowing the shape and the form of our eyebrows.
Now let's go ahead and add some cross country lines to our boot.
So go ahead and set this drawing aside and then I'm going to grab my boot drawing that we did from before.
So we just have a basic simple sheep drawing or line drawing what we want to do now is we want to add
some highlights and values in there.
Now don't worry if you don't understand how to add shadows and highlights and values I want you to do
is look at your object or your boot.
If you're drawing a boot too.
And I want you to study where those dark shadows are and where those light are areas are.
And I want you to try to recreate that by using cross contouring lines.
So for example I'm going to have more of a dark shadow edge along this bottom area like so and when
I add those in I want to follow the sheet of this boops.
So rather than just doing straight lines like so I want to actually follow the shape of this boot when
I add in the shadows
then there's probably going to be a little bit more shadow along the edge so I'm going to go ahead and
add it in like so and the top surface is going to be left pretty bright because it's going to be being
hit by the light
but you'll see my cross conjuring shadows are following the film.
That's the important part.
We would probably be getting shadow underneath this edge here just a little small one so I can go ahead
and add in some cross contrat there and then inside here this is going to be very interesting part and
this will really demonstrate how crosscountry worked.
So in here we're going to have a lot more Shatto but we don't just want to do straight lines across
it or fill it in with black because it's more on these edges.
They're going to be a lot darker shadows and then this entire area is going to be a lot lighter.
So we're going to add that in like so and we want to follow the form.
So it's going to curve around like so we're here.
We had a little bit darker and then we can lay in this middle area just see him adding that curve in
there because what's happening in there is it's kind of making a tornado not a tornado but like a funnel
that's going down or a cylinder.
It's more of a cylinder shape.
And so you want to really create that with your contouring lines.
We can also add some contouring lines on the sole of her boot.
So just like so we'll add some in here.
Now this area right here is straighter than right there because this part of the boot is a flat straight
surface.
And so that's why it looks like that.
So it's OK to use straight lines sometimes you just want to make sure that it's actually going along
with the form of your boot.
All right.
That brings us to the end of this lecture.
So in this lecture you learn all about cross country lines you learn that there are a lot better than
just doing straight contrarian lines and then make your images look a lot more realistic.
So just remember cross-country lines are lines that are used to create the form of your object.
They go along the same shape is your object and that's what creates that form.
Now with your assignment for this section of the Course is to go ahead and find an object or take the
object that you've already been drawing and go ahead and draw your line drawing and then you're going
to go ahead and you're going to add in your cross contouring to your image.
And I want you to try to spend as much time on this as possible.
Now if you really want to go the extra mile and really get your brain for your buck out of this course
I really recommend that you do this with a lot of objects at least five different objects and 20 would
be better.
The more you study the better you're going to be I know it seems like everybody says that but it's cuz
it's true.
Practice makes perfect.
Thanks for watching and I look forward to seeing you in the next lecture.